Operator Status <Upgrade Readiness> Enhancement (#23)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/upgrade-readiness.md

The scenario above could place the operator in an unrecoverable state. OLM must provide operators that it manages with a method to communicate whether or not the operator is ready to be upgraded. 

### Goals

- Provide opreators with the means to communicate whether or not they should be upgraded.
- Prevent operators from being upgraded if they communicate that they should not be upgraded.
- Preserve existing behavior should the operator not communicate its upgradeable status.

### Non-Goals

- Support operator version rollback.
- Provide operators with the means to cancel an upgrade that is in process.

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an operator author, I want my operator to be able to communicate that OLM should not attempt to upgrade my operator until I remove the flag.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about this idea?

The operator can signal it's readiness using the existing condition array in the status field. This does not requires API changes.

e.g.
``` json
  {
    "lastHeartbeatTime": "2020-06-08T13:01:39Z",
    "lastTransitionTime": "2020-06-08T12:59:12Z",
    "message": "Reconcile completed successfully",
    "reason": "ReconcileCompleted",
    "status": "True",
    "type": "Upgradeable"
  }
```

Reviewer 2: The status of the CSV? That seems like it would break the pattern of status ownership on the operator of the object (the OLM operator). Also, what about when that operator is running in an environment where OLM does not exist? Or when OLM migrates to a different version of the API? I would be concerned about a tight coupling here that I think we should try to avoid.

Reviewer 3: This places the upgrade readiness on the collection of CRs owned by the operator in question. I think it's technically possible (although discouraged from what I understand) for an operator not to have a CRD associated with it.

Reviewer: No. The CR's status

Author: The latest version of this PR is very similar to this suggestion, please review.

Reviewer: :+1: 

I also liked the probe CR addition, though our CR is a singleton and we don't need it.

This actually what we implemented in KubeVirt's hyperconverged-cluster-operator (HCO): https://github.com/kubevirt/hyperconverged-cluster-operator/blob/beccfd1fb274e283c86b848a5109d376e1cb3c7f/pkg/controller/hyperconverged/hyperconverged_controller.go#L501

Operators can communicate update readiness by exposing an `upgradeReadiness` endpoint. This endpoint can communicate readiness by:

- printing 0, indicating that the operator cannot be upgraded at this time.

> - printing 1, indicating that the operator is ready to be upgraded.

Reviewer 3: I think it wise to make this a json payload. maybe we only care about readiness true/false right now. But eventually someone's going to ask "well why isn't it ready?" Then they'll want a message associated with it. Then someone will ask "can we get info about when readiness was set to false?" And we'll add a timestamp. Then someone will find some sort of race condition that has to be accounted for and want us to indicate when readiness was last iterated on, which will require another timestamp.

The point is, maybe a boolean will work, but it's feasible we'll want more in the future. A json payload opens up possibilities.

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`.

## Alternatives

The are viable alternatives to the solution proposed in this enhancement.

### Subsbitute the UpgradeReadinessService with an UpdateProbe

It is possible that we could take advantage of the standard defined by [Liveness, Readiness, and StartUp Probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/) by importing the [Prober](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.18/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go#L48) code. There are cons and benefits to this approach defined below:

**This seems to be the most viable alternative.**

#### Pros

- Follows a well defined probe format which supports [HTTP Gets, EXEC, and TCPSocket](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/6f652b6ce59c386f4a431eb031d0339620aaff5e/core/v1/types.go#L2279-L2292) options.
- Enables OLM to identify which POD is reporting an upgradeReadiness failure, as a service could route to one of any number of pods.

#### Cons
- Requires OLM create an import and maintain prober code which executes the probe.

> ### Create an API so Operators may report Status

Reviewer 4: to me this seems the most robust solution, one idea I had was to have operators implement a gRPC interface that OLM could then invoke, that allows a wide range of operator logic to be implemented within the operator and in any language.

## Motivation

Today, OLM does not provide operators with the ability to block upgrades as the operator completes a critical process. Consider the following example:

An operator has three versions available, v1, v2, and v3 where v2 has a long-running process that migrates resources in v1 to the new schema in v2. As of today, if operator v1 was installed with automatic updates enabled, and v2 and v3 became available at the same time, OLM would upgrade the operator from v1 to v2 to v3 without allowing v2's migration process to run. 

The scenario above could place the operator in an unrecoverable state. OLM must provide operators that it manages with a method to commuincate whether or not the operator is ready to be upgraded. 

### Goals

- Provide opreators with the means to communicate whether or not they should be upgraded.

> - Update OLM so operators are not upgraded if they communicate that they should not be upgraded.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Prevent operators from being upgraded if they communicate that they should not be upgraded.
```

> - Preserve existing behavior should the operator not commuincate its upgradeable status.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Preserve existing behavior should the operator not communicate its upgradeable status.
```

### Non-Goals

- Support operator version rollback.
- Provide operators with the means to cancle an upgrade that is in process.

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an operator author, I want my operator to be able to communicate that OLM should not attempt to upgrade my operator until I remove the flag.

> ### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints
```

Operators can communicate update readiness by exposing an `upgradeReadiness` endpoint. This endpoint can communicate readiness by:

- printing 0, indicating that the operator cannot be upgraded at this time.
- printing 1, indicating that the operator is ready to be upgraded.

> This endpoint will be exposed via a [Service resource](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#service-resource) that OLM will probe for update readiness prior to upgrading the operator to the next version.

Reviewer 6: Say an operator writes `1` to this endpoint, immediately dies somehow, then an upgrade is made available; would OLM not upgrade the operator because it has some other pod status indicating it isn't healthy, or would it attempt to upgrade since it got a positive probe response?

Author: As outlined in the enhancement, if the operator is in a ready state and exposes that it is "upgradeable", the upgrade will kickoff. Once an upgrade is kicked off, OLM will not support rollback.

> This feature must be supported by both CSV and CSVless bundles.

Reviewer 7: should it apply to all mediatypes?

Author: Yes.

#### CSV Bundles

> OLM's [ClusterServiceVersion](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/197407cd70e8ddfef85d21216085ed52fbb4bb2d/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/clusterserviceversion_types.go#L500) type will be updated to include a upgradeableService for each [StrategyDeploymentSpec](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/197407cd70e8ddfef85d21216085ed52fbb4bb2d/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/clusterserviceversion_types.go#L63).

Author: There could be multiple readiness endpoints.

> OLM's [ClusterServiceVersion](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/197407cd70e8ddfef85d21216085ed52fbb4bb2d/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/clusterserviceversion_types.go#L500) type will be updated to include a upgradeableService for each [StrategyDeploymentSpec](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/197407cd70e8ddfef85d21216085ed52fbb4bb2d/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/clusterserviceversion_types.go#L63).

Reviewer 7: so several labels? I basically want to minimize the work to cut a new version for CSV.

> OLM's [ClusterServiceVersion](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/197407cd70e8ddfef85d21216085ed52fbb4bb2d/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/clusterserviceversion_types.go#L500) type will be updated to include a upgradeableService for each [StrategyDeploymentSpec](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/197407cd70e8ddfef85d21216085ed52fbb4bb2d/pkg/operators/v1alpha1/clusterserviceversion_types.go#L63).

Reviewer 7: this is also me unaware of the benefit of cutting a version for CSV in light of this feature.

There are two options for defining a Upgradeable Readiness Service in the CSV.

> ##### Approach 1: Define the service

Reviewer 6: Since CSV's are going away anyway, wouldn't it be best to only support approach 2?

Author: Although OLM plans to deprecate the CSV, I do not believe that we have reached the point where OLM will stop supporting new features in the CSV.

CC @njhale @ecordell

As a developer, you may wish to include the readiness service in the CSV for rapid itteration. This can be accomplished by setting the upgradeReadinessServices's spec in the CSV.

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterServiceVersion
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: olm
spec:
  description: |
    An example opreator
  displayName: foo-operator
  install:
    spec:
      deployments:
      - name: foo-operator

>         upgradeReadinessServices:              # An array of readiness services

Author: Let's continue the discussion [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23#discussion_r434103785)

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterServiceVersion
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: olm
spec:
  description: |
    An example opreator
  displayName: foo-operator
  install:
    spec:
      deployments:
      - name: foo-operator
        readinessServices:                     # An array of upgradeReadiness services
        - name: foo-operator-readiness-service # The name of the Service
        spec:
          replicas: 1
          selector:
            matchLabels:
                app: foo-operator
          template:
            metadata:
              labels:
                app: foo-operator
            spec:
              containers:
              - name: foo-operator
                image: foo
                command:
                  - sleep
                  - "3600"
    strategy: deployment
  installModes:
  - supported: false
    type: OwnNamespace
  - supported: true
    type: SingleNamespace
  - supported: true
    type: MultiNamespace
  - supported: true
    type: AllNamespaces
  maturity: alpha
  provider:
    name: Red Hat
  version: 1.0.0
```

> The operator bundle should include the following Service:

Reviewer 5: Should there be an opm/sdk story for failing validation if no service object is found matching?

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: foo-operator-readiness-service
spec:
  selector:
    app: foo-operator
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: 9376
```

#### CSVless Bundles

> In the case of a CSVless bundle, an annotation can be applied to the `annotations.yaml` which incdicates the name of the upgradeReadinessService and the deployment name:

Reviewer 7: Would you consider putting this in `olm.yaml` which is for OLM's non-inferable information? The CSVless bundle work is still targeting to generate CSV at runtime (@njhale correct me if i'm wrong). This way we can use the same approach to your bundle with CSV.

Author: I was unaware of the `olm.yaml`, that seems appropriate. General approach would remain the same. Please confirm @njhale

> ```yaml

Reviewer 5: could there just be an annotation on the Service object in the bundle, instead of surfacing this in the annotations?

  operators.operatorframework.io.deployment.<DeploymentName>.readiness.service: "<ServiceName>"
```

Once the `annotations.yaml` is created with the key/value above, the following resources should appear in the operator bundle:

- A service whose name matches the `ServiceName` in your annotation which routes to the readiness endpoint.
- A deployment
  - Whose name matches the DeploymentName used in your annotation
  - Has a `podTemplate` with an annotation that is selected by your label

### Risks and Mitigations

- Not all operators may take advanatage of this feature. If an operator does not opt-in to this feature, OLM will fallback on existing behavior when checking if an operator can be upgraded.

> - Operator may opt-in to this feature but never update the endpoint as "upgradeable". In these situations, cluster admins must uninstall the operator and upgrade the operator manually.

Reviewer 5: Is this a risk? this seems like the feature working as intended.

- If OLM reports metrics to Telemeter regarding whether or not an operator is upgradeable an unbounded metric is being reported. An unbounded metric may overwhelm Telemeter.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

OLM's e2e testing suite will be upgraded to handle the usecase:

- If a CSV defines a upgradeReadiness Service without a spec that does not exist, upgrades for that operator are blocked.
- If a CSVless bundle defines a upgradeReadiness Service that does not exist, the bundle fails to build.
- If a CSV defines an upgradeReainess Service with a spec, changes to the service are reverted by OLM.

> - If a CSV/CSVless bundle defines an upgradeReainess Service that returns a 0, upgrades to the operator are blocked. The operator then upgrades when the service is no longer blocked.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- If a CSV/CSVless bundle defines an upgradeReadiness Service that returns a 0, upgrades to the operator are blocked. The operator then upgrades when the service is no longer blocked.
```

> Additionally, tests that use CSVs that omit the upgradeReainess Service must continue to adhear to existing behavior.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Additionally, tests that use CSVs that omit the upgradeReadiness Service must continue to adhere to existing behavior.
```

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`.

## Alternatives

The are viable alternatives to the solution proposed in this enhancement.

> ### Subsbitute the UpgradeReadinessService with an UpdateProbe

Reviewer 6: Would the amount of code/YAML a user would have to write for the `Service` approach defined above be more/less/the same as a probe approach? It seems like probes are easy to define, and I'm not familiar with writing application code exposed via a `Service` endpoint (seems like it would be a simple bit of server code).

Author: Total agreement here - After the initial draft, I looked more into the probe approach and believe that it's the best route - pending no opposition/convincing arguments from reviewers.

CC @ecordell @kevinrizza @njhale

Author: The previous comment no longer applies in the latest version of this PR after looking into this more.

**This seems to be the most viable alternative.**

#### Pros

- Follows a well defined probe format which supports [HTTP Gets, EXEC, and TCPSocket](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/6f652b6ce59c386f4a431eb031d0339620aaff5e/core/v1/types.go#L2279-L2292) options.
- Enables OLM to identify which POD is reporting a upgradeReadiness failure, as a service could route to one of any number of pods.

#### Cons
- Requires OLM create an import and maintain prober code which executes the probe.

### Create an API so Operators may report Status

OLM could introduce a new API that allows operators to report their upgradeReadiness

#### Pros

- Provides a single source of truth for upgradeReadiness.

#### Cons

- Increases the number of APIs that OLM introduces. OLM has already received negative feedback on the number of APIs one must work with.

> - Behaves differently from other standard Kubernetes probes.

Reviewer 8: I'm not sure how this is a con. It's normal to report status on a custom resource, often through conditions, and this would be a great fit. We don't need to think of this necessarily as a "probe".

Author: I would argue that this is a con:

- Requiring Operator Authors to edit the status introduces a higher barrier to entry than mimicking the Readiness/Liveness/StartUp readiness probe approach, which is often learned by even non-operator authors.
- Creating a new API creates additional "OLM domain specific knowledge", a complaint that many users have already voiced.

Reviewer 5: I think it's worth discussing this option a bit more. There are "degrees" to this that we have discussed:

- Having a standard "upgradeable" condition, that operators can write into their _own_ APIs, which OLM then understands. 
- Having a an API which _OLM_ writes based on other inputs (update probes, standard conditions, config in the operator that says "I'm not upgreadable if you see X value in one of my CRs")
- Having an API (the same one) that operator authors opt-in to writing, if they choose to integrate with OLM more.

Author: The latest version of the PR now discusses this approach in much greater detail.

### Operators write to the status of the CSV/operator API

OLM could allow operator authors to write to the status object of an API that OLM manages.

#### Pros

- No new APIs
- Should require less OLM code

#### Cons

- Places ownice on Operator Authors to learn OLM specific readiness reporting conventions.
- Requires Operator Authors to write to the status of an OLM owned resource.
- OLM would probably need to provide operator authors with a library to report readiness to standardize the approach.

> - Operators could place the operator's status in a bad state.

Reviewer 8: What do you mean by this?

Author: With this approach, operator author are now responsible for editing the status of the CSV or Operator object. OLM has no ability to limit the operator from changing items other than readiness within the status. For example, imagine an operator that accidentally removes the phase from the CSV Status. OLM would kick off an install.

OLM can provide both operator authors and cluster admins a significantly better user experience by creating a channel for the operator to communicate state that OLM cannot infer otherwise.

### Goals

- Provide operators with the means to communicate complex states that OLM cannot infer.
- Provide operators with the means to inform OLM that the operator should not be upgraded or uninstalled.
- Update OLM not to upgrade operators if the operator communicates that it should not be upgraded.
- Preserve existing behavior should the operator not communicate its upgradeable status.

### Non-Goals

- Support operator version rollback.
- Provide operators with the means to cancel an upgrade that is in process.

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an operator author, I want my operator to be able to communicate complex states to OLM that it cannot infer otherwise.

#### Story 2 (core requirement)

As an operator author, I want my operator to be able to communicate that OLM should not attempt to upgrade or uninstall my operator until I tell it otherwise.

## Design Details

> ### The OperatorStatus CRD

Reviewer 9: Would this CRD live in our `api` repo? Users would import all the OLM types to access this one API. I'm wondering if we want this to be a standalone repo, so that if this API becomes an established standard it can be in its own repo. Putting the cart before the horse a bit but just a thought.

Author: Good point - given that the proposed solution no longer introduces an API I am going to mark this as resolved.

> ### The OperatorStatus CRD

Reviewer 9: One question I have is whether this CRD is namespace scoped or cluster scoped? How do we handle cases where we have multiple versions of the same operator installed in the same cluster, like the AWS connector operator? 

If there is a 1-1 mapping of the CR to each operator, what happens when some operators are ready to update and others are not. It's an edge case but worth thinking about

Author: This question was directed at the previous design, but I want to address it because it is still relevant to the existing approach.

The plan was for the CRD introduced by OLM to be namespaced. If an operator is installed in multiple namespaces on a cluster and one of the operators are reporting that the operator cannot be resolved, the operator will not upgrade without cluster admin intervention. This is by design, OLM cannot ignore an operator that reports that it cannot be upgraded.

Author: Although this question was brought up against the previous design, it is still a great question!

> One question I have is whether this CRD is namespace scoped or cluster scoped

The proposed CRD would have been namespaced.

> If there is a 1-1 mapping of the CR to each operator, what happens when some operators are ready to update and others are not. It's an edge case but worth thinking about

Given that the CRD is namespaced and each installation of the operator is allowed to communicate their upgrade readiness I do not believe this would be an issue.

> OLM will introduce a new namespaced [CustomResourceDefinition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-kubernetes-api/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/) called the OperatorStatus CRD. The OperatorStatus CRD will be used by operator to:

Reviewer 10: We have the `Operator` CRD, why create a new CRD?

Author: Moved the new CRD approach to an alternative option.

---
title: operator-status
authors:
  - "@awgreene"
reviewers:
  - "@ecordell"
approvers:
  - "@kevinrizza"
creation-date: 2020-05-19
last-updated: 2020-06-10
status: implementable
see-also:
  - "N/A"  
replaces:
  - "N/A"
superseded-by:
  - "N/A"
---

# operator-status

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

The goal of this enhancement is to allow operators managed by the [Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM)](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager) to communicate conditions and states that OLM would otherwise be unable to infer. The presence of certain conditions should influence OLM behavior to protect the cluster.

## Motivation

OLM currently infers the state of an operator by inspecting the Kubernetes resources that define the operator. OLM does not provide operators with the means to communicate complex states that cannot be inferred without operator specific knowledge.

> Operators managed by OLM would benefit from the ability to communicate their state directly to OLM through a supported channel. Operators could communicate complex conditions and influence how OLM manages the operator, dramatically improving user experience.

Author: This is correct - but since the OF is a CNCF project we try to avoid mentioning potential OpenShift specific tie-ins.

> Operators managed by OLM would benefit from the ability to communicate their state directly to OLM through a supported channel. Operators could communicate complex conditions and influence how OLM manages the operator, dramatically improving user experience.

Author: This is true, but typically the OF/Enhancements does not mention anything OpenShift specific.

A core requirement of this enhancement is to provide operators with the ability to communicate to OLM that the operator should not be upgraded while a critical process is being executed. Consider the following scenario based on OLM today:

> > An operator installed with automatic updates is executing a critical process that could place the cluster in a bad state if interrupted. While this critical process is running, a new version of the operator becomes available. Since the operator was installed with automatic updates, OLM upgrades the operator without allowing the critical process to finish and places the cluster in an unrecoverable state.

Reviewer 8: Without a way to guarantee that N's upgrade completed, an N-1 compatibility requirement becomes N-∞. We can't know if any prior upgrade work completed, so every operator release would need to retain the ability to upgrade from any prior release and do all the upgrade work in between.

Upgrades sometimes require migration of data or configuration. The operator will often handle that, whether it's a CRD change, transforming operand data, reconfiguring the operand, or something else. We know that an operator should evaluate current state and then move that toward desired state, but over time, the number of possible current states grows, potentially to an unmaintainable scope.

At some point, an operator will want or need to drop migration code that it's been carrying a long time. There will be a final release, after which the operator will no longer be able to perform some particular migration. At that point, the operator needs a way to express whether upgrade is safe

> > An operator installed with automatic updates is executing a critical process that could place the cluster in a bad state if interrupted. While this critical process is running, a new version of the operator becomes available. Since the operator was installed with automatic updates, OLM upgrades the operator without allowing the critical process to finish and places the cluster in an unrecoverable state.

Reviewer 11: ok, that's helpful.  it sounds like this is not at all about interruptibility though, and entirely about upgradability, so let's make sure the end result of this enhancement focuses on that (it somewhat does today, but there's also a lot of discussion about interruptibility)

> > An operator installed with automatic updates is executing a critical process that could place the cluster in a bad state if interrupted. While this critical process is running, a new version of the operator becomes available. Since the operator was installed with automatic updates, OLM upgrades the operator without allowing the critical process to finish and places the cluster in an unrecoverable state.

Reviewer 10: @awgreene I think @mhrivnak's explanation is a solid expansion. Could we find a way to include it here?

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an operator author, I want my operator to be able to communicate conditions to OLM that it cannot infer otherwise.

#### Story 2

As an operator author, I want my operator to be able to communicate that OLM should not attempt to upgrade or uninstall my operator until I tell it otherwise.

## Design Details

Operators will communicate with OLM by setting [conditions](https://dev.to/maelvls/what-the-heck-are-kubernetes-conditions-for-4je7) on an owned CustomResource. Conditions are used by many Kubernetes Resources to provide users with additional insight into the state of the resource. For those unfamiliar with conditions, they typically follow the following format:

| Field | Description |
| ----- | ----------- |
| Type |  A one-word description of the condition. |
| Status | Status is the status of the condition. Can be True, False, Unknown. |
| Reason | Unique, one-word, CamelCase reason for the condition's last transition. |
| Message | Human-readable message indicating details about last transition. Typically used by cluster admins for debugging purposes. |

> | LastTransitionTime | Last time the condition transitioned from one status to another. |

Reviewer 12: This (or a lastHeartbeatTime) might be a useful field to enforce a hard or soft grace-period. A NotInterruptible condition must be updated at least every 30 minutes, for example. If not:
1) Soft grace-period - let the user know through OLM that the operator needs their attention.
2) Hard grace-period - assume the process in unrecoverable and allow the upgrade to continue anyway.

Author: This is an interesting idea. My only concern is an operator that does not update the condition within the Hard grace-period could lead to severe consequences that OLM can't anticipate. If we decide to proceed down this route, it seems like an Operator Author should be able to opt-out of the hard grace-period. Thoughts?

Reviewer 12: Allowing them to opt out is worth considering, but should probably be discouraged since it instills a false confidence. A workload being able to pick up where it left off without corrupting data is part of being a k8s workload. I see this enhancement as OLM being polite. When a node is drained, or a pod evicted, the operator will not receive the same politeness (just a normal k8s graceperiod before SIGKILL).

Author: > A workload being able to pick up where it left off without corrupting data is part of being a k8s workload. 

+1000, unfortunately we've seen time and again that some operators are unable to deliver their operator in this format.

> I see this enhancement as OLM being polite. When a node is drained, or a pod evicted, the operator will not receive the same politeness (just a normal k8s graceperiod before SIGKILL).

I'm not convinced that this is the right approach. If operators are truly successful and used by our customers to drive their business there could easily be a situation where OLM ignoring a critical condition of an operator causes direct revenue loss. Your suggestion might be the right approach, but I want other to share their opinions as well. CC @shawn-hurley @ecordell

Author: > IMO, it would be an admins choice to enable a hard grace-period or a soft grace-period and they would be responsible for the risks associated with the workloads they run. I could see lots of folks being very happy having a hard grace-period while others may very much want a soft grace period. The key here would be documenting the user choice.
I don't think that operator author would get the choice here, they get the ability to state some things and if the user want's to ignore or take other actions I don't think OLM should get in the way of that

100%

> If this is something we are debating, are we adding a user story for it or capturing it for a follow up somewhere? I don't want to lose the idea.

I can update this enhancement or create it as an epic we introduce later to keep the scope of this enhancement smaller - whichever you prefer.

Reviewer 10: I think we could get something similar -- w/o putting the onus on the operator to supply the heartbeat -- by supporting "condition source" combinations; e.g. `upgradeable=f(CR, pod)`, where perhaps the pod being ready is required for `f(CR, pod)=true`.

### OLM Supported Conditions

Although an operator may set any condition on a CustomResource that it owns, there will be a subset of "OLM Supported Conditions" which will influence the behavior of OLM when present. The list of "OLM Supported Conditions" can be seen in the table below:

| Condition Name | Effect |
| -------------- | ------ |

> | NotInterruptible | When true, OLM will not upgrade the operator. The pod associated with the operator may still be killed by external forces.|

Reviewer 9: Based on the description you provided, should this be `NotUpgradable` instead? As you noted, the the process can still be interrupted by external forces. 

Also, to minimize the potential for OLM to pickup conditions that are not intended for it by the operator (false positives) would it make sense to have an `OLM` prefix or something for the condition? Like `OLM.NotUpgradable = true`

Author: >Based on the description you provided, should this be NotUpgradable instead? As you noted, the the process can still be interrupted by external forces.

I had considered naming this condition `NotUpgradeable` but was concerned that we might want to use this condition for additional purposes down the road. I believed that `NotInterruptible` gave us enough wiggle room to allow operator to express their intent by setting the condition while giving OLM enough wiggle-room to expand on the behavior as we can make additional guarantees. An argument against this may be changing default upgrade behavior, but I assumed that the benefit of keeping "Operator Intent" clear was worth it.

>Also, to minimize the potential for OLM to pickup conditions that are not intended for it by the operator (false positives) would it make sense to have an OLM prefix or something for the condition? Like OLM.NotUpgradable = true

I believe this concern is discussed [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23/files#diff-e72af68c33ea1f2583161d8a322dbf62R170). Basically, by requiring an operator to define the mapping there is no room for the conflict to occur.

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 13: What about signaling readiness/health or an error at install/upgrade?

Author: Sounds useful, I can update this proposal to include the readiness condition.

Author: > or an error at install/upgrade

This is vague. If an operator fails to install how will it write to the status? A failure post startup?

Reviewer 14: How do operator maintainers decide between reporting via `Important` vs. setting an alert?

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Author: @njhale requested that we keep in line with the [standard k8s condition naming convention](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties), Abnormal True Polarity.

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 15: Is there some other name that isn't negated (NotX) that would still hold with abnormal-true? I think both concerns are valid.

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 13: I think this is confusing `NotAvailable: false`. This means "this is available," but it is pretty hard to follow that. We should consider the UX of when someone is looking at this to see problems. Do they have to do strict syntax parsing, or is it obvious?

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 16: While kube has a long time request to make the default of things false if you can't come up with an easy to understand name it is acceptable to have a file with default True.

NotUpgradeable: False is really hard for a human.
Upgradable: True is really easy.

Unless you can come up with a really easy name other than NotUpgradable, you want to use the default true here.

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 17: +1 to Shawn and Eric - NotUpgradeable: false is a confusing double negative, not something we should ask our users to try to reason about.

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 18: I think Tim slipped this in to the conventions without adequate review, and going back and reviewing it I disagree with the premise and would block it in api review in Kube if someone tried to use a double negative.

Conditions should make sense to humans.  Conditions should not force humans to think about negation.  The presence of a condition is a separate and orthogonal signal to the value of a condition, and we will always be adding new conditions.  I would *never* recommend or approve a `NotAvailable` condition in Kube review (in fact I would hard block it), so I think the condition description in conventions needs to be updated with more coherent recommendations.

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Reviewer 18: Latest discussion in https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/4521

> | Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Author: The latest version of the PR no longer uses double negatives.

### Why Communicate through CustomResources

There are many reasons why operators should communicate their conditions through owned CustomResources:

- CustomResources are the main entrypoint to an operator and operators are already expected to update the status of the CustomResource to communicate "Actual State".
- By writing the condition to the status of an owned CustomResource, it becomes very clear which CR is responsible for changing OLM behavior.
- Introducing an OLM owned CRD forces operators to integrate with OLM at a much deeper level than writing to a resource that they already manage. If OLM were to provide a CRD, the operators would be required to detect if it is being managed by OLM and begin writing to the API. By writing to an owned CR, the Operator does not require OLM specific code and can be run independently of OLM.
  - As a bonus, OLM will not increase the scope of APIs that it owns.

### How Operators will opt-in

> Operators must opt-in to "OLM Supported Conditions" by adding an annotation to their owned CRD, where the key is the defined by OLM and the value is the `type` of the condition on the CR.

Reviewer 9: What if the CR that has the not condition is from a required CRD, and not an owned CRD? 

For example, vault has a requirement on etcd. Say the vault migration fails due to a etcd cluster in a bad state - the vault operator would write the condition to the vault CR? That seems to work. I feel like there is some additional complexity in this area that is worth looking at - are we covering all the cases.

Author: This is a great point and should be discussed in greater detail in this enhancement. I believe that OLM should consider if an operator can be upgraded when calculating a new `Generation`.

"metadata": {
  "annotations": {
    "olm.Condition.NotInterruptible" : "Migrating",
    "olm.Condition.Important" : "badConnectivity,unhealthyDatabase",
  }
}
```

By adding this annotation, OLM will search for all `foo` CustomResources and search for the `Migrating` Condition before upgrading the operator to the latest version.

Now let's view the `foo` CR on cluster:

```yaml
apiVersion: foo.bar.com/v1
kind: Foo
metadata:
  name: foo-database
spec:
  ...
  ...
  ...
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Migrating # Condition 1
    status: true
    reason: "CriticalProcess" 
    message: "Migrating old database schema to new format"
  - type: unhealthyDatabase # Condition 2
    status: true
    reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
    message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."
  - type: badConnectivity # Condition 2
    status: true
    reason: "404" 
    message: "Unable to reach the database"
```

From the presence of the `Migrating` condition, OLM will understand that it should not upgrade the operator. The Operator also communicates that the `reason` the operator cannot be upgraded is due to a "critical process" and provides a human readable `message` for cluster admins.

> OLM will also highlight Conditions 1 and 2 within the new [Operator API](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/master/crds/operators.coreos.com_operators.yaml) within the [condtions](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/master/crds/operators.coreos.com_operators.yaml#L108) in the status.

Author: @njhale should we create an "OLM Supported Conditions" condition array?

> Note that by adding the `NotInterruptible` "OLM Supported Condition" to each CR, OLM will not upgrade the operator if any CR reports this condition as `true`.

Reviewer 9: This can block operator upgrades if a particular CR ends up in a bad state and is unable to recover (for example the DB migration fails). I think it's valid to block the upgrade in that case regardless but its worth pointing out - at that point only a manual cleanup will allow for an upgrade.

Reviewer 12: Suggestion here to help UX in this scenario: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23#discussion_r441609005

Author: I think requiring cluster admin intervention is the safest approach, but @jupierce offered an interesting [alternative](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23/files#r441609005).

Reviewer 9: I think that's a very interesting idea, to have hard and soft limits for the condition and proceeding anyway. Some thoughts around this:

- By mandating a certain status gets updated every 30 minutes we are really starting to mandate how operator authors write their operator, which lowers adoption. Asking them to write a certain condition to their status is straightforward enough (they are doing it anyway) but saying to do it periodically is different. The logic definitely grows more complex, and I think we would be the ones to have to provide a library for them to use. 
- Conceptually, a grace period is used when something is wrong. I don't think `NotInterruptible` is necessarily a bad condition that an operator needs to get out of - it's a transient condition that indicates a workload is in progress and has state, like an ML training job. We would expect that eventually the workload comes out of that state and the operator goes back to an upgradable state. 
- as @awgreene mentioned, OLM terminating workloads without user input is pretty risky behavior in general. Any deletion/upgrade event is initiated by the user, either by deleting the CSV or the subscription moving to a new version. The subscription makes the process seamless but still the user updates the catalog on the cluster with the new version, either explicitly or via catalog polling. It's really up to the operator author to make sure their operands are well behaved. 

All that being said, I think you suggestion brings up a need for an example, in code, of how to set and unset the condition and best practices for it. That way operator authors have a clear picture of how to use the condition to their benefit.

> The complexity of communicating state of an operator can be reduced by having the operator introduce a new CRD which is used to communicate its conditions. This creates a single source of truth for the state of the operator.

Reviewer 13: Is this saying "Each operator may just need to create a CRD that is OLM status" and that we are punting on defining that type?

If it is, then I would prefer we define it and can make it useful (see below comments).

Author: The idea is not to punt on defining the CRD, it is to avoid forcing operators to write to an OLM CRD. By doing so we:
- Make it easier for operators to integrate with OLM.
- Avoid expanding OLM's api surface.
- Avoid forcing operators to identify when they are ran with OLM.

Reviewer 13: > Make it easier for operators to integrate with OLM.

I think you are helping an admin or someone package an operator for OLM to consume. I don't think that we are making it easier to integrate with OLM and easily communicate intent to OLM. Having to write a new API for my operator to do this, and then seeing 100's of other operators having to do the same is going to cause more confusion for each one of those operators. I would also think that it would cause confusion for admins, rather then having two known resources where status of the operator is written it is all over the place and sometimes in these API's defined by the library. I really think that an intermediate step of collection of the status to an API that can also be written to will be generically helpful for both cases. 

> Avoid expanding OLM's api surface.

This is true, we avoid OLM's api surface growing, but at the cost of asking 100's of operators to make a new API on their own. I think 1 new api for OLM is worth that trade off.

> Avoid forcing operators to identify when they are ran with OLM.

I am having hard time seeing how this does that. I think that if we went with the approach that I am asking for, it would be a simple "Does X API exist if not don't write status there". That seems like a reasonable thing to have operators do, especially when they want to tie to OLM. The folks who will write their own API want to be tightly integrated into OLM and I think we are making it harder for them to do that.

Reviewer 11: +1 to what @shawn-hurley says here (and echoes what i said elsewhere in this review before seeing shawn's comments)

Author: These concerns should be resolved in the latest version of the PR.

The OperatorStatus CRD would be used by operator to:
- Communicate conditions and states that should influence how OLM manages the operator, such as preventing OLM from upgrading the operator.
- Communicate messages to cluster admins, such as slow off-cluster queries or poorly configured CRs. These communications will not influence OLM behavior.

Similarly, OLM may use the OperatorStatus CRD to:
- Communicate to cluster admins the state of an operator, such as why an operator is unable to be upgraded.
- Communicate with the operator about upcoming actions.

#### Pros

- A single point of communication between OLM and Operators.
- Feature is opt-in, operators can choose not to take advantage of this feature.
- This approach can be expanded to support new communication channels easily.
- Allows communication of conditions that influence OLM or provide helpful messages to Cluster Admins.

#### Cons

> - Operators are required to know when they are managed by OLM and write to an OLM resource.

Reviewer 13: I thought that there was a thought, that the above implementation would be aggregated to this object and that an operator could choose to write this object OR OLM would use the above annotations to write out to this object that then would be picked up by the operator API? 

Giving some operators more detailed control rather than having to update every CR seems like a valuable addition.

Author: > I thought that there was a thought, that the above implementation would be aggregated to this object and that an operator could choose to write this object OR OLM would use the above annotations to write out to this object that then would be picked up by the operator API?

I believe that your thinking of the `Operator API` that @njhale introduced where the conditions of "operator objects" are aggregated.

> Giving some operators more detailed control rather than having to update every CR seems like a valuable addition.

If an operator does not want to communicate state using multiple CRs they can introduce a single CRD that they write status to.

Reviewer 13: > If an operator does not want to communicate state using multiple CRs they can introduce a single CRD that they write status to.

Reviewer 9: I think we didn’t want to expand the API surface because from the F2F we heard “OLM has too many apis” and “we want to simplify things for users”. But in this case if the trade-off is not worth it, and things get actually more complex without a new API, and we are given license to make a new API, we should do so.

@njhale brought up the point that something like an `OperatorStatus` API overlaps a lot with the Status of the `Operator` API that is being introduced, so it could potentially be confusing to the end-user if we offer them both. If the new `Operator` API becomes writeable that could potentially be a good place for this API to live. 

Another argument against introducing a new API is that it further couples OLM to the operators that it runs -- this goes counter to the ongoing work to remove the dependency on a CSV and have OLM run arbitrary kube objects to ease the burden on operator authors. The operator would write to this API (create a CR) only on OLM-managed clusters -- meaning operator behavior becomes conditional on where its running, which further increases the burden of using OLM and potentially lowers adoption of this new feature

- Expands the scope of APIs introduced by OLM.
- Could confuse users since the OLM owned Operator CRD already conveys status.

### Alternative 2: Operators write to the status of the CSV or Operators API

This approach considered allowing Operators to write to the status of the [CSV](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/6468209c61b24bed76ed4701eba1a8b7f81b2377/crds/operators.coreos.com_clusterserviceversions.yaml#L7) or the [Operators](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/6468209c61b24bed76ed4701eba1a8b7f81b2377/crds/operators.coreos.com_operators.yaml#L7) API rather than introducing a new API managed by OLM and was quickly abandoned for the reasons discussed below in Pros/Cons.

#### Pros

- No new APIs.
- A single source of truth for operator status.
- Could easily expand to support other communication channels.

#### Cons

- Operators are required to know when they are managed by OLM and write to an OLM resource.
- Requires Operator Authors to learn OLM specific readiness reporting conventions.

> - Operators granted the ability to update a CSV's status can change fields which influences OLM behavior. For example, the operator might accidently change the `Phase` of a CSV.

Reviewer 11: another con is that in general we try to avoid having multiple writers to a single resource (in this case you'd have OLM and the operator itself both writing to the CSV)

### Example

Operators may opt-in to "OLM Supported Conditions" by adding an annotation to their owned CRD, where the key is the defined by OLM and the value is the `type` of the condition on the CR.

The "OLM Supported Condition" annotation key will adhere to the following format: `olm.Condition.<ConditionName>`. The value of the annotation will match the `Type` of the condition. For example, the `Upgradeable` condition's annotation key will be `olm.Condition.Upgradeable`.

"OLM Supported Condition" annotation keys will map to multiple condition types separated by commas if needed.

Let's consider an operator that installs a database. Assume that the operator already communicates that a database migration is in progress by setting the "Migrating" condition type in the status of the `foo` CustomResourceDefinition and the operator does not want to upgrade when a database is Migrating. In this case, the operator's CRD should include the following annotations:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata: {
  name: foo
  annotations: {

>     "olm.Condition.Upgradeable" : "Migrating"

Author: You can define these annotations on multiple CRDS. When there are more than one CRD that defines these annotations, if any CR which states that the operator cannot be upgraded, the operator will not be upgraded. Key collision is fine - a key can be applied to multiple "OLM Supported Conditions".

    "olm.Condition.Important" : "BadConnectivity,UnhealthyDatabase"
  }
}
```

When this annotation is present on a CRD, OLM will append the following `Probe` CR to the `installPlan`:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: operators
spec:
  specOverride: crdAnnotations # Changes to the CRD's annotations should override the spec. SPO will watch the CRD for changes to the "OLM Supported Condition" annotations and update the spec accordingly.
  probeResources:

>   - name: foo.example.com 

Reviewer 10: Is this only updated from a CRD's annotations a matching <kind>.<group> is added here?

Author: Because of the `spec.specOverride: crdAnnotations` field above, the array of `probeResources` will be managed by the SPO.

Reviewer 10: let me rephrase: new CRDs cannot be discovered dynamically without updating this spec.

Is this an accurate statement?

Author: I have not planned to implement logic such that new CRDs are automatically discovered. OLM has typically taken the approach that the operator does not introduce CRDs itself.

    upgradeable: # Converted to array
    - Migrating
    important: # Converted to array
    - BadConnectivity
    - UnhealthyDatabase
```

When the`probe` resource above is created, OLM will spin up an SPO pod which collects the information from conditions of `foo.example.com` CRs and communicate it to OLM via the `probe`'s status accordingly. The permissions of the probe will match the same permissions of the operator.

>Note: If the probe's spec is nil, SPO will not create a pod and the operator will be expected to update the CRs status itself.

In this example, the pod will be responsible for maintaining the following fields in the status of the `probe` resource:

```yaml
status:
  upgradeable: # A boolean that represents if the operator may be upgraded - aggregated from all probeResources below.

>   probeResources: # The list of resources the probe will watch and the conditions of those resources.

Author: > what are the rules for aggregating this into upgradeable?
If any condition reports that the operator is not upgradeable, the `upgradeable` field is set to false.

> I would also expect a top-level conditions field that holds the reduction of probeResources for all condition types.
I think this is answered below in the example:

My plan was that a `.status.probeResources` would list each CRD and would list each CR with the Name/Namespace and the conditions associated with it.

>   probeResources: # The list of resources the probe will watch and the conditions of those resources.

Reviewer 10: This works, maybe I missed these explanations in the proposal somewhere.

```

> Consider an upgrade where the a single `Foo` CR exists on cluster:

Author: An operator will get a single probe resource.

```yaml
apiVersion: foo.example.com/v1
kind: Foo
metadata:
  name: foo-example
  namespace: default"
spec:
  ...
  ...
  ...
status:

>   probeResources:

Author: That is correct - this should have its own `.status.conditions` array - will fix this.

  - resource: "foo.example.com"
    - uid: "xxx"
      conditions:
      - type: Migrating # Condition 1
        status: true
        reason: "CriticalProcess" 
        message: "Migrating old database schema to new format"
      - type: unhealthyDatabase # Condition 2
        status: true
        reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
        message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."
      - type: badConnectivity # Condition 3
        status: true
        reason: "404" 
        message: "Unable to reach the database"
```

From this CR, OLM will update the Probe CR like so:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe

> metadata:

Author: > To be aggregated by an Operator resource, a Probe will need to be "adopted". Adoption should consist of finding the package and install namespace that originated this Probe, and labelling it with the operator name (which is a combination of package and install namespace).

Agreed.

> This also brings up an interesting question, can a single probe be owned by multiple operators? 

I do not believe that a single probe should be owned by multiple operators, each probe should represent the state of a single operator.

> What does multiple single namespace installs for a CRD look like.
 
This is a great point and one that I have to update the PR to point out. The probe should always be in the same namespace as the operator that owns it. This should make it fairly easy to capture which probe represents which operator.

> metadata:

Reviewer 10: It's hard for me to think of a -- nice -- set of rules we can apply to figure out which CRs to pull into a Probe then.

For namespaced-scoped CRs, you could say only the CRs in the install namespace are included, but that limits the author in the case where a CR in another namespace is critical to its operation. Further, for cluster-scoped CRs, that heuristic is no longer useful and now we need to make a decision about how they are shared amongst probes that reference them.

This seems to be another case where our scoping discussion rears its head again.

... but since this needs to be compatible with our current design, I wonder if we can sidestep the issue by placing the annotations on individual CRs, pushing off the "all CRs in a tenant" use case for now. The implication is that authors now need to include a `Probe` resource in their manifests, but I'm not sure how different that is from adding annotations to an existing CRD manifests in the first place.

> metadata:

Author: > For namespaced-scoped CRs, you could say only the CRs in the install namespace are included, but that limits the author in the case where a CR in another namespace is critical to its operation. Further, for cluster-scoped CRs, that heuristic is no longer useful and now we need to make a decision about how they are shared amongst probes that reference them.

The probe will look for CRs in all namespaces included in the operator group that the operator is installed in. I do not see where there would be an issue identifying which CRs are pulled into a probe.

> metadata:

Author: > Further, for cluster-scoped CRs, that heuristic is no longer useful and now we need to make a decision about how they are shared amongst probes that reference them.

If the operator is installed at a cluster level, OLM would not allow a new operator providing the same API to be installed so I don't believe that this applies.

  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: operators
spec:
  probeResources:
  - name: foo.example.com

>     upgradeable:

Reviewer 5: Won't it be important to know polarity information here?

In this example, `Migrating` is treated as `Upgradeable`. But when `Migrating=true`, I expect `Upgrading=false`

You could also imagine conditions with the opposite polarity, i.e. `NotBusyAtAll: true` should be translated to `Upgradeable: true`

```yaml
 probeResources:
  - resource: foo.example.com
     type: Upgradeable
     name: Migrating
     polarity: AbnormalTrue | NormalTrue
```

or would it be more reasonable to allow boolean expressions over condition types?
```yaml
 probeResources:
  - name: foo.example.com
     upgradeable: !Migrating
```

```yaml
 probeResources:
  - name: foo.example.com
     upgradeable: !Migrating && ReadyToGo
```

Reviewer 19: Agree, in general it seems off that the status of the `upgradeable` condition is not a boolean but could be anything inbetween `migrating`, `badconnectivity`, `unhealthydatabase`. Not all these states would prohibit upgrades. A simple `true` or `false` would go a long way in making this more approachable.

Author: I will update the enhancement to include boolean expressions over condition types (option 2).

Author: Addressed in the latest version of the PR.

    - Migrating
    important:
    - badConnectivity
    - unhealthyDatabase
status:
  upgradeable: false # Overall Upgradeable condition
  probeResources:
    - resource "foo.example.com"
      - uid: "xxx"
        conditions:
        - type: Upgradeable # Migrating changed to "Upgradeable".
          status: false
          reason: "CriticalProcess" 
          message: "Migrating old database schema to new format"
        - type: Important # unhealthyDatabase changed to "Important".
          status: true
          reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
          message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."

>         - type: Important # badConnectivity changed to "Important".

Author: I haven't seen any indications that multiple conditions of the same type cannot be present.

>         - type: Important # badConnectivity changed to "Important".

Reviewer 10: I think this precludes us from using strategic merge patch when `type` is used as the merge-key, which I know is true of the `conditions` field in the current `Operator` API schema.

>         - type: Important # badConnectivity changed to "Important".

Author: I'm still looking into the merge-key issue, but [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xoi0v_b__A6mMHYUAI640RCPhufSHyBhmqD84vU2TWM/edit?ts=5f0632aa#) is an example with multiple sources for a condition.

>         - type: Important # badConnectivity changed to "Important".

Author: [This enhancement](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/3aa92e20bdfa2e60e3cb1a2b92cdca61847d7ad2/keps/sig-api-machinery/1623-standardize-conditions/README.md#proposal) is also relevant.

| Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Operators will communicate thier conditions through one of two methods:

1. By setting conditions on CustomResource that the operator owns.
2. By setting conditions on a `Probe` CustomResource directly.

#### Why allow operators to communicate status through CustomResources

There are many reasons why operators should communicate their conditions through owned CustomResources:

- CustomResources are the main entrypoint to an operator and operators are already expected to update the status of the CustomResource to communicate "Actual State".
- By writing the condition to the status of an owned CustomResource, it becomes very clear which CR is responsible for changing OLM behavior.
- Introducing an OLM owned CRD forces operators to integrate with OLM at a much deeper level than writing to a resource that they already manage. Operators would be required to detect if it is being managed by OLM and begin writing to the API. By writing to an owned CR, the Operator does not require OLM specific code and can be run independently of OLM.

> 

Author: OLM will start a SPO, which will manage the resource. The SPO will not need to create any pods. I will update this tonight.

- The operator should not be upgraded when a `Foo` CR has the `Migrating` condition set to true.
- OLM should surface any CR condition whose `Type` matches `BadConnectivity` or `UnhealthyDatabase` in the `Probe` resource.

In this case, the operator's CRD should include the following annotations:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata: {
  name: foo
  annotations: {
    "olm.operatorframework.io/condition.Upgradeable" : "!Migrating" # The operator is upgradeable when the CR is not being migrated.
    "olm.operatorframework.io/condition.Important" : "BadConnectivity || UnhealthyDatabase" # The Important condition should only include the `OR` boolean operator.
  }
}
```

When this annotation is present on a CRD, OLM will append the following `Probe` CR to the `installPlan`:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: operators
spec:
  specOverride: crdAnnotations # Changes to the CRD's annotations should override the spec. SPO will watch the CRD for changes to the "OLM Supported Condition" annotations and update the spec accordingly.
  probeResources:

>   - resource: foo.example.com

Author: This should include the gvk/gvr.

| Upgradeable | When `false`, OLM will not upgrade the operator.|
| Important | OLM will highlight this condition to the Cluster Admin.|

Operators will communicate their conditions through one of two methods:

1. By setting conditions on CustomResource that the operator owns.
2. By setting conditions on a `Probe` CustomResource directly.

### Why allow operators to communicate status through CustomResources

There are many reasons why operators should communicate their conditions through owned CustomResources:

- CustomResources are the main entry point to an operator and operators are already expected to update the status of the CustomResource to communicate "Actual State".
- By writing the condition to the status of an owned CustomResource, it becomes very clear which CR is responsible for changing OLM behavior.
- Introducing an OLM owned CRD forces operators to integrate with OLM at a much deeper level than writing to a resource that they already manage. Operators would be required to detect if it is being managed by OLM and begin writing to the API. By writing to an owned CR, the Operator does not require OLM specific code and can be run independently of OLM.

> Allowing operators to write to the status of any CR creates a potential scaling issue if enough CRs are on cluster. OLM will avoid these performance issues by introducing the Status Probe Operator (SPO) which will reconcile the `probe` resource. If an operator chooses to write to their own CRs, SPO will create a pod that will keep the status of the `probe` resource synced with the conditions in the CRs.

Reviewer 10: acronyms++

### Opting into OLM Supported Conditions

> Operators may opt-in to "OLM Supported Conditions" by adding annotations to their owned CRD(s), where the key is the defined by OLM and the value is a boolean expression over condition types applied to the CR at `.status.conditions`. The "OLM Supported Condition" annotation key will adhere to the following format: `olm.Condition.<ConditionName>`.

Reviewer 10: could this be `operators.coreos.com/condition.<condition-name>` instead?

Author: Absolutely.

Author: Addressed in the latest version of the PR.

  - type: UnhealthyDatabase # Condition 2
    status: true
    reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
    message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."
  - type: BadConnectivity # Condition 3
    status: true
    reason: "404"
    message: "Unable to reach the database"
  - type: SomethingUnrelated # Condition 4
    status: true
    reason: "Unmatched"
    message: "OLM doesn't care about this condition"
```

When SPO registers this CR, the Probe CR will be updated like so:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0 # Same name as the CSV.
  namespace: operators
spec:
  specOverride: crdAnnotations # When set to `crdAnnotations` OLM will override any changes to the probe's spec to match those defined via annotations on the CRDs described above.
  probeResources:
  - name: foo.example.com
    upgradeable: "!Migrating"
    important: "BadConnectivity || UnhealthyDatabase"
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Upgradeable # Overall Upgradeable condition
    status: false
    reason: "NotUpgradeable"
    message: "The operator has communicated that the operator is not upgradeable"
  probeResources:

>   - resource: "foo.example.com"

Reviewer 10: could we make this a [RichReference](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/master/pkg/operators/v2alpha1/operator_types.go) instead?

Author: Addressed in the latest version of the PR.

Operators managed by OLM would benefit from the ability to communicate their state directly to OLM through a supported channel. Operators could communicate complex conditions and influence how OLM manages the operator, dramatically improving user experience.

A core requirement of this enhancement is to provide operators with the ability to communicate to OLM that the operator should not be upgraded while a critical process is being executed. Consider the following scenario based on OLM today:

>An operator installed with automatic updates is executing a critical process that could place the cluster in a bad state if interrupted. While this critical process is running, a new version of the operator becomes available. Since the operator was installed with automatic updates, OLM upgrades the operator without allowing the critical process to finish and places the cluster in an unrecoverable state.

OLM can provide a significantly better user experience by creating a channel for the operator to communicate state that OLM cannot infer otherwise.

### Goals

- Provide operators with the means to explicitly communicate a condition that OLM cannot infer on its own.

> - Allow operators to define specific conditions which will influence OLM behavior, such as the "Upgrade Readiness" condition defined above.

Reviewer 13: nit: I don't see the "Upgrade Readiness" above this.

Author: I had imagined that "Upgrade Readiness" would be infered from [this passage](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23/files#diff-e72af68c33ea1f2583161d8a322dbf62R39),  but will update the passage to read:

> A core requirement of this enhancement is to provide operators with the ability to communicate "Upgrade Readiness", allowing the operator to completes a critical process without being upgraded by OLM.

Author: Addressed in the latest release of this PR.

- Preserve existing behavior should the operator not communicate its upgradeable status.

### Non-Goals

> - Provide operators with the means to cancel an upgrade that is in process.

Reviewer 13: Add as a non-goal in my opinion: `Provide a means where an operator is not interruptable"

Reviewer 10: The double negatives here might be confusing me a little, but isn't putting this in non-goals similar to saying: "I'm not going to propose a way for operators to block upgrades"?

There are many reasons why operators should communicate their conditions through owned CustomResources:

- CustomResources are the main entry point to an operator and operators are already expected to update the status of the CustomResource to communicate "Actual State".
- By writing the condition to the status of an owned CustomResource, it becomes very clear which CR is responsible for changing OLM behavior.
- Introducing an OLM owned CRD forces operators to integrate with OLM at a much deeper level than writing to a resource that they already manage. Operators would be required to detect if it is being managed by OLM and begin writing to the API. By writing to an owned CR, the Operator does not require OLM specific code and can be run independently of OLM.

Allowing operators to write to the status of any CR creates a potential scaling issue if enough CRs are on cluster. OLM will avoid these performance issues by introducing the Status Probe Operator (SPO) which will reconcile the `Probe` resource. If an operator chooses to write to their own CRs, SPO will create a pod that will keep the status of the `Probe` resource synced with the conditions in the CRs.

> >Note: Unfortunately, OLM will not support an operator communicating its status via cluster-scoped CRs. If an operator is scoped to a namespace but writes conditions to a cluster-scoped CR, OLM would be unable to identify which operator is communicating its status if multiple installs of the operator were present on cluster.

Reviewer 10: What if we include the name of the probe as another annotation applied to individual CRs to disambiguate which `Probe(s)` they are related to.

Taking this a little further, what if all the annotations were per-CR or resource, and putting condition annotations on a CRD was just syntax sugar which projected the annotations to all CRs on the cluster.

Orthogonal: I think we should also point out that we're excluding CRs provided by APIServices w/ the design as well.

Author: > What if we include the name of the probe as another annotation applied to individual CRs to disambiguate which Probe(s) they are related to.

If OLM is responsible for adding this probe annotation, I do not know how OLM could identify which CRs are owned by the operator at the cluster level. The operator would need to add these annotations itself and know about the Probe resource on cluster. At that point, the operator could probably integrate with OLM's probe resource directly.

> Taking this a little further, what if all the annotations were per-CR or resource, and putting condition annotations on a CRD was just syntax sugar which projected the annotations to all CRs on the cluster.

While this is more flexible, I believe it could introduce a lot of additional complexity to end users. If each and every resource CR can communicate readiness in a variety of different ways it seems like it would be far more difficult to understand the state of your cluster at any given point. If an operator author wanted such flexibility, it seems like they should integrate more tightly with OLM and just manage the probe resource themselves     .

Reviewer 10: > If OLM is responsible for adding this probe annotation,

The operator author or operator would be responsible for adding this annotation. 

>  I do not know how OLM could identify which CRs are owned by the operator at the cluster level.

If you add the ability to annotate per-CR, you give users the ability to select the cluster-scoped CR that should be viewed.

> If each and every resource CR can communicate readiness in a variety of different ways it seems like it would be far more difficult to understand the state of your cluster at any given point. If an operator author wanted such flexibility, it seems like they should integrate more tightly with OLM and just manage the probe resource themselves .

but we already have this with the current design, just at the CRD level. I can define X distinct CRD condition annotations for an operator that provides X CRDs. In both situations, it's up to the `Probe` resource to reduce all of the conditions.

### Opting into OLM Supported Conditions

Operators may opt-in to "OLM Supported Conditions" by adding annotations to their owned CRD(s), where the key is the defined by OLM and the value is a boolean expression over condition types applied to the CR at `.status.conditions`. The "OLM Supported Condition" annotation key will adhere to the following format: `olm.operatorframework.io/condition.<ConditionName>`.

> Let's consider the case where an operator is upgradeable when the migrating condition on a CR is false, the "OLM Supported Condition" annotation should be `olm.operatorframework.io/condition.Upgradeable: "!Migrating"`. Alternatively, the operator could  indicate that it is upgradeable when both the `ReadyToGo` and `FinishedMigrating` conditions are true by adding the `olm.operatorframework.io/condition.Upgradeable: "FinishedMigrating && ReadyToGo"` annotation.

Reviewer 10: does the operator do this, or the author?

Author: The Operator Author, I'll update the text.

### Example Workflow

Let's examine the complete workflow for an operator that owns the `Foo` crd where:

- The operator should not be upgraded when a `Foo` CR has the `Migrating` condition set to true.
- OLM should surface any CR condition whose `Type` matches `BadConnectivity` or `UnhealthyDatabase` in the `Probe` resource.

In this case, the operator's CRD should include the following annotations:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata: {
  name: foo
  annotations: {
    "operators.coreos.com/condition.Upgradeable" : "!Migrating" # The operator is upgradeable when the CR is not being migrated.
    "operators.coreos.com/condition.Important" : "BadConnectivity || UnhealthyDatabase" # The Important condition should only include the `OR` boolean operator.
  }
}
```

> When this annotation is present on a CRD, OLM will append the following `Probe` CR to the `installPlan`:

Reviewer 13: What happens at update time if my operator shifts to having a probe resource in the bundle, are we able to handle that case?

During upgrade do we sync the CRD and we would lose any overrides? 

What is the value of making these annotations on the CRD's and not adding the probe resource to opt-in?

Author: > What happens at update time if my operator shifts to having a probe resource in the bundle, are we able to handle that case?

`Probes` will be owned by CSVs. During an upgrade, the old Probe will be acquired by the new CSV and updated based on the spec provided in the bundle. 

>  During upgrade do we sync the CRD and we would lose any overrides?

Once the probe is updated during an upgrade, the specOverride field would be set to the new values defined in the bundle. If the new probe had the specOverride field set to "crdAnnotations", then yes the sync would change overrides. If the new probe does not have the specOverride field set, then the crdAnnotations would not influence behavior.

> What is the value of making these annotations on the CRD's and not adding the probe resource to opt-in?

I might need to tap in @exdx and @njhale for this one, as the conversation we had was quite some time ago. There is no reason a user could not opt-in to this feature by including a probe resource in their bundle. The annotation approach without the Probe resource was a means to minimize the efforts of operator authors to integrate with the new OLM feature.

Reviewer 10: Similarly, if the annotations define the probe when it's not provided in a bundle, can't we just generate probes dynamically at any time (not just in the InstallPlan)?

> When this annotation is present on a CRD, OLM will append the following `Probe` CR to the `installPlan`:

Reviewer 10: If the annotations define the probe when it's not provided in a bundle, can't we just generate probes dynamically at any time (not just in the InstallPlan)?

Author: Yes - but if an installPlan is a ledger of resources created as part of an installation, it seems like we should include the probe resource created for the operator within.

Reviewer 10: That's a decent point. 

Devil's advocate: Do we add pods and replicasets for deployments we list in the installplan? We don't do this for `Operator` resources (which are created on-the-fly as well).

Real reasoning: InstallPlans are one-off installations. As a user, I would expect probe annotation changes to affect probes on-cluster. We've already seen pushback with CSV's and RBAC, where users have defined everything they need to in the CSV, but still need an InstallPlan to generate the RBAC for them; I see this problem as similar.

  - type: UnhealthyDatabase # Condition 2
    status: true
    reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
    message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."
  - type: BadConnectivity # Condition 3
    status: true
    reason: "404"
    message: "Unable to reach the database"
  - type: SomethingUnrelated # Condition 4
    status: true
    reason: "Unmatched"
    message: "OLM doesn't care about this condition"
```

When SPO registers this CR, the Probe CR will be updated like so:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0 # Same name as the CSV.
  namespace: operators
spec:
  specOverride: crdAnnotations # When set to `crdAnnotations` OLM will override any changes to the probe's spec to match those defined via annotations on the CRDs described above.
  probeResources:
  - name: foo.example.com
    upgradeable: "!Migrating"
    important: "BadConnectivity || UnhealthyDatabase"
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Upgradeable # Overall Upgradeable condition
    status: false
    reason: "NotUpgradeable"
    message: "The operator has communicated that the operator is not upgradeable"

>   probeResources:

Reviewer 13: this is going to get un-readable once you add three CR's nevermind 100. 

Can these instead become refs to the CR's that are causing the condition to trigger?

````yaml
probeResources:
- name: foo-example
  namespace: default
  kind: Foo
  group: foo.example.com
  reason: "!Migrating"
```

I get the desire to include the entire decision, I am just worried that it will be too much for a user to read.

Author: That's fair - I am fine removing the list of conditions and simply including the reason.

Author: Given that a single resource may cause multiple OLM Supported Conditions to fire, I suggest making the `reason` field an array of strings.

Reviewer 14: Do we need to explain this at all?  Or can we have something more opaque like [`relatedObjects`][1] that just points at the involved resources, and leaves it up the the included `message` and external docs like this enhancement to spell out the important pieces (e.g. `default/foo-example has UnhealthyDatabase and BadConnectivity` instead of the example's current, generic `The operator has communicated that the operator is not upgradeable`).

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/2ea89d203c53704f1fcfeb55c13ededab14fd020/config/v1/types_cluster_operator.go#L49-L54

    conditions:
    - type: Migrating
      status: True
      reason: "CriticalProcess"
      message: "Migrating old database schema to new format"
    - type: UnhealthyDatabase # UnhealthyDatabase is an "Important" condition.
      status: true
      reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
      message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."
    - type: BadConnectivity # BadConnectivity is an "Important" condition.
      status: true
      reason: "404"
      message: "Unable to reach the database"
```

>Note: `status.probeResources` will be an array of [Rich References](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/bdbc43301d4385ae137472c080d2f4037fbff2b1/pkg/operators/v2alpha1/operator_types.go#L65-L73).

From the presence of the false `Upgradeable` condition, OLM will understand that it should not upgrade the operator. The Conditions used to evaluate the overall `Upgradeable` status of the Operator are stored within the `status.probeResources` array. Notice that the Condition that did not map to an "OLM Supported Condition" was not tracked in the `Probe`.

>Note: If a single CR communicates that the operator is not upgradeable, OLM will not upgrade the operator.

> The complexity of communicating state of an operator can be reduced by having the operator introduce a new CRD which is used to communicate its conditions. This creates a single source of truth for the state of the operator.

Reviewer 13: It seems that this would be `I can write to the Probe resource myself` option that we discussed but needs to be discussed and added to this enhancement IMO.

Author: I'll make sure to call that out at the end of the enhancement.

Reviewer 10: I think this is talking about reducing the cardinality to a singleton CR of a  CRD **owned** by the operator, rather than writing to the `Probe` resource which is provided by OLM.

> but needs to be discussed and added to this enhancement IMO.

Agree that we should mention this as a secondary pattern for communicating to OLM.

Author: > I think this is talking about reducing the cardinality to a singleton CR of a CRD owned by the operator, rather than writing to the Probe resource which is provided by OLM.

This snippit does call out the pattern mentioned by @njhale - I have added a small blurb at the end of the proposal highlighting the pattern where the operator writes to the probe resource directly.

---
title: operator-status
authors:
  - "@awgreene"
reviewers:
  - "@ecordell"
approvers:
  - "@kevinrizza"
creation-date: 2020-05-19
last-updated: 2020-06-10
status: implementable
see-also:
  - "N/A"  
replaces:
  - "N/A"
superseded-by:
  - "N/A"
---

# operator-status

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

The goal of this enhancement is to allow operators managed by the [Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM)](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager) operator to communicate conditions and states that OLM would otherwise be unable to infer. The presence of certain conditions should influence OLM behavior to protect the cluster.

## Motivation

> OLM currently infers the state of an operator by inspecting the Kubernetes resources that define the operator. OLM does not provide operators with the means to communicate complex states that cannot be inferred without operator specific knowledge.

Reviewer 14: nit: "OLM does not ... cannot ..." is double-negative.  Maybe simplify to:

> OLM does not currently provide operators with the means to communicate complex states.

or some such?

Operators managed by OLM would benefit from the ability to communicate their state directly to OLM through a supported channel. Operators could communicate complex conditions and influence how OLM manages the operator, dramatically improving user experience.

A core requirement of this enhancement is to provide operators with the ability to communicate "Upgrade Readiness", providing operators with the ability to signal to OLM that they should not be upgraded at this time. Consider the following scenario based on OLM today:

> >An operator installed with automatic updates is executing a critical process that could place the cluster in a bad state if interrupted. While this critical process is running, a new version of the operator becomes available. Since the operator was installed with automatic updates, OLM upgrades the operator without allowing the critical process to finish and places the cluster in an unrecoverable state.

Reviewer 14: This example conflicts with the:

> OLM cannot guarantee that some outside force will not interrupt the services of the operator and will not provide the operator with the ability to communicate that it should not be "Interrupted".

Non-goal.  Personally, I prefer the non-goal.  The solution to "things break when I do dangerous, irrecoverable things and get updated part-way through" is "don't do dangerous, irrecoverable things".  A better example for this enhancement might be "later versions of my operator, which you might be considering updating to, are not compatible with the current cluster state.  If you update me to those versions, I will break".  Or something like that?

Author: >ersonally, I prefer the non-goal. The solution to "things break when I do dangerous, irrecoverable things and get updated part-way through" is "don't do dangerous, irrecoverable things". 

This example is meant to highlight that OLM will not start the upgrade process while an operator is communicating that it cannot be upgraded to the next version.

>A better example for this enhancement might be "later versions of my operator, which you might be considering updating to, are not compatible with the current cluster state. If you update me to those versions, I will break". Or something like that?

As @ecordell [discussed](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23#discussion_r474012292), this example is slightly different than the issues we are trying to address in this enhancement.

> OLM could  handle the scenario described above had the operator had the ability to communicate that it should not be upgraded as it ran the critical process.

Reviewer 14: nit "could  handled" -> "could handle" (doubled space)

### Goals

- Provide operators with the means to explicitly communicate a condition that influences OLM behavior, such as the "Upgrade Readiness" condition defined above.

> - Preserve existing behavior if the operator does not take advantage of this feature.

Reviewer 11: is there an intent here that OLM will then propagate this status to the CVO in order to block OCP upgrades under certain conditions?

Reviewer 14: Operators saying "don't update me" and "don't update the host cluster where I live" seem like two different things.

Reviewer 11: it's somewhat orthogonal but i bring it up because we are moving forward with documentation that says "make sure all your operators are at the latest version before your upgrade your cluster", so if we know it's physically impossible for your operators to be at the latest version for some reason, it seems worth considering if we should also blocked the cluster upgrade.  (in fact even if it's possible to upgrade your operators but you haven't done so, it would also be nice to block the upgrade).

does not have to be covered here, but wanted it in people's heads.

Reviewer 5: It's not explicit here (because this is an operator-framework enhancement) but the goal here is to allow more communication between OLM <> Operators, and in the future use that to inform the communication between OLM <> CVO and decisions around cluster upgrades. That will be spelled out in a future openshift enhancement, though

Reviewer 14: It might also be worth changing `Upgradeable` to `OperatorUpgradeable` or some such in this enhancement to distinguish between the two cases, so we don't end up with `ClusterUpgradeable` about "please don't bump the host system" and an unqualified `Upgradeable` about "please don't bump me, the operator".

Author: >It might also be worth changing Upgradeable to OperatorUpgradeable or some such in this enhancement to distinguish between the two cases, so we don't end up with ClusterUpgradeable about "please don't bump the host system" and an unqualified Upgradeable about "please don't bump me, the operator".

I don't believe that this will be an issue given that this communication channel will exist between OLM and the operator that it manages. OLM would still communicate to CVO using the existing clusteroperator resource.

Reviewer 14: So how would OLM know which sub-operator `Upgradeable=False` we're "hold the core, my current version is incompatible with future core APIs" and should be passed along in the ClusterOperator and which were "don't bump me, my future versions will break on the current cluster" and should not be passed on?

Author: The OLM team has discussed the scenarios that @wking is describing but I don't believe that we've met any finite decisions.

That being said, I don't know that operators will be responsible for handling either of these scenarios. They certainly can, but it  places a lot of burden on the operators to understand the requirements of an operator that hasn't been released yet (version n of an operator must know the requirements of operator version n+1). 

In the past, we had discussed having OLM make intelligent decisions when upgrading an operator by looking at available APIs and the RBAC associated with the operator. In this scenario, OLM could identify both of the cases @wking mentioned.

Again, I haven't kept up with this aspect of OLM and would welcome a comment from @ecordell if I am operating off stale info..

Reviewer 5: @wking that's the "other side" of this problem (and isn't something that should be addressed in this operator-framework enhancement). 

This enhancement is just for operators communicating to OLM that they're in the middle of something important, which has been a long-standing problem for upgrades.

With this enhancement done, OLM could later use that to inform CVO that an operator is currently not in an interruptible state (which likely should mean reporting itself `Upgradeable=false` with the ability for an admin to indicate that they don't care about interrupting certain operators). 

But that's not sufficient to determine whether a cluster upgrade is safe. The latest thing we've discussed on that front is that we probably want to _default_ to OLM reporting `Upgradeable=false` to CVO for any operator that's installed that doesn't have an explicit "I work on OCP version range X" where X is the next minor release (the mechanism of how we get that information still under some discussion) - but that will be a new enhancement in openshift/enhancements, since it's OCP-specific.

Reviewer 14: > With this enhancement done, OLM could later use that to inform CVO that an operator is currently not in an interruptible state (which likely should mean reporting itself Upgradeable=false with the ability for an admin to indicate that they don't care about interrupting certain operators).

On the CVO side, `Upgradeable=False` only blocks minor updates, not patch level updates.  If a particular workload wants to mark itself uninterruptible, or otherwise make claims about how interruptible it is, it should use [pod disruption budgets][1].  That will also protect you from things like [deschedulers][2].  So maybe the only thing that needs a new, update-specific channel is "I'm not comfortable with the host environment or other external dependencies updating right now".

[1]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/
[2]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler

| Field | Description |
| ----- | ----------- |
| Type | Type of condition in CamelCase or in foo.example.com/CamelCase. |
| Status | Status of the condition, one of True, False, Unknown. |
| ObservedGeneration | If set, this represents the .metadata.generation that the condition was set based upon. |
| LastTransitionTime | Last time the condition transitioned from one status to another. |
| Reason | The reason for the condition's last transition in CamelCase. |
| Message | A human readable message indicating details about the transition. |

OLM will define a set of "OLM Supported Conditions" which will influence the behavior of OLM when present. The list of "OLM Supported Conditions" can be seen in the table below:

| Condition Type | Effect |
| -------------- | ------ |

> | Upgradeable | When `false`, OLM will not upgrade the operator.|

Reviewer 14: In OpenShift, we pivoted `Upgradeable` to only block minor+ bumps, and to no longer block patch bumps ([rhbz#1797624][1]).  That allows you to gracefully recover from:

> I released a broken patch which sets `Upgradeable=False` more aggressively than I meant, and now I want to left folks perform patch updates out of that version without having to jump through whatever hoops the overly-strict version required to clear `Upgradeable=False`.

However, it also relies on two assumptions:

* Operator workloads are always interruptible for patch bumps.  Which you definitely want, but this enhancement seems maybe not ready to commit to (e.g. [here][2]).
* Patch bumps never make any changes large enough that you'd actually _want_ to block them.  Which you also want, but I have no idea how well folks SemVer their operators, if they SemVer them at all...

[1]: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1797624
[2]: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23#discussion_r441723661

spec:
  ...
  ...
  ...
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Migrating # Condition 1
    status: true
    reason: "CriticalProcess"
    message: "Migrating old database schema to new format"
  - type: UnhealthyDatabase # Condition 2
    status: true
    reason: "LivenessProbeFailure"
    message: "The foo-database failed its liveness probe."
  - type: BadConnectivity # Condition 3
    status: true
    reason: "404"
    message: "Unable to reach the database"
  - type: SomethingUnrelated # Condition 4
    status: true
    reason: "Unmatched"
    message: "OLM doesn't care about this condition"
```

When SPO registers this CR, the Probe CR will be updated like so:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0 # Same name as the CSV.
  namespace: operators
spec:
  manager: crdAnnotations # When set to `crdAnnotations` OLM will override any changes to the probe's spec to match those defined via annotations on the CRDs described above.
  probeResources:
  - name: foo.example.com
    upgradeable: "!Migrating"
    important: "BadConnectivity || UnhealthyDatabase"
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Upgradeable # Overall Upgradeable condition

>     status: false

Reviewer 14: nit: `status: false`.  This is a string-ish type, not a YAML boolean.

Author: Thanks - I have made local changes which corrects this in all places.

The functions provided within the library will detect if the `Probe` CRD is present on the cluster using the Discovery API. If the `Probe` resource exists, the library will provide a set of functions allowing a user to `GET` or `UPDATE` the operator's `Probe`.

The library will also communicate to OLM that the operator is managing the `Probe` resource by setting the `spec.manager` field to `operator`. When the `spec.manager` field is set to `operator`, the library will throw an error if the `spec.ProbeResources` field is not `nil`.

At the time of this enhancement, the operator will only need to manage its `Upgradeable` condition.

#### Example: Operator Managed Probe Resource

Let's consider what the `Probe` resource may look like for the Foo operator:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: operators
spec:
  manager: operator  # When set to `operator`, the operator must manage the state of the probe resource.
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Upgradeable # Overall Upgradeable condition

>     status: false     # The operator is not upgradeable

Reviewer 14: nit: `status: "False"` [again][1].

[1]: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/23#discussion_r469695684

    reason: "FooProcess"
    message: "The operator is not upgradeable because FooProcess is running"
```

In this case, the operator is communicating that OLM should not upgrade the operator at this time. Likewise, the operator could convey that OLM may upgrade the operator with the following `Probe`:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Probe
metadata:
  name: foo-operator.v1.0.0
  namespace: operators
spec:
  manager: operator
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Upgradeable # Overall Upgradeable condition
    status: True      # The operator is upgradeable
    reason: "ReadyForUpgrade"
    message: "The operator is ready to be upgraded"
```

### Test Plan

OLM's e2e testing suite will be upgraded to handle the usecase:

- If an operator does not opt-in to "OLM Supported Conditions", OLM reverts to existing behavior.
- If an operator opts-in to the `Upgradeable` "OLM Supported Conditions":
  - Upgrades are not blocked if no CRs exist.
  - Upgrades are not blocked if a CR exists but the condition is missing
  - Upgrades are not blocked if a CR exists, the mapped condition type is present and is not equal to `false`.

>   - Upgrades are blocked if a CR exists, the mapped condition type is present and `true`.

Reviewer 14: Something in here is not right, because if the condition is `true`, then both "present and `true`" (blocked) and "present and is not equal to `false`" (not blocked) would match.

Author: Great point - this should have been updated to incorporate the boolean expressions over condition types.

Author: This is an error - I will correct it. Thanks @wking!

Author: Addressed in the current version of the PR.

### Risks and Mitigations

> - OLM cannot assume that a Condition on a CR with the type `Upgradeable` maps to the `Upgradeable` "OLM Supported Condition". It is impossible for OLM to guarantee that an "OLM Supported Condition" type is not already being used as a condition type by some operator in the world. By making this feature opt-in only, OLM avoids this conflict.

Reviewer 14: Well, you could scope your condition like `operatorframework.io/Upgradeable`.  That makes conflicts very unlikely, and allows you to sigh and roll your eyes dramatically if there is still a conflict ;).  But opt-in works too...

Author: Ha that's totally true! The goal with making things opt-in was to allow operator authors to take advantage of this feature without modifying any code / existing conditions.

- Introducing an OLM owned CRD forces operators to integrate with OLM at a much deeper level than writing to a resource that they already manage. Operators would be required to detect if it is being managed by OLM and begin writing to the API. By writing to an owned CR, the Operator does not require OLM specific code and can be run independently of OLM.

Allowing operators to write to the status of any CR creates a potential scaling issue if enough CRs are on cluster. OLM will avoid these performance issues by introducing the Status Probe Operator (SPO) which will reconcile the `Probe` resource. If an operator chooses to write to their own CRs, SPO will create a pod that will keep the status of the `Probe` resource synced with the conditions in the CRs.

>Note: Unfortunately, OLM will not support an operator communicating its status via cluster-scoped CRs. If an operator is scoped to a namespace but writes conditions to a cluster-scoped CR, OLM would be unable to identify which operator is communicating its status if multiple installs of the operator were present on cluster.

### Opting into OLM Supported Conditions

> Operators may opt-in to "OLM Supported Conditions" by adding annotations to their owned CRD(s), where the key is the defined by OLM and the value is a boolean expression over condition types applied to the CR at `.status.conditions`. The "OLM Supported Condition" annotation key will adhere to the following format: `operators.coreos.com/condition.<ConditionName>`.

Reviewer 5: don't we have an operatorframework.io prefix that we use now?

Author: Afterlooking through OLM code, it looks like we user `operators.operatorframework.io` elsewhere. We could update this annotation to `operator.operatorframework.io/condition.<ConditionName>`, thoughts?

Author: I should mention that there are 40 characters in `operator.operatorframework.io/condition.`, leaving only 23 characters for Condition Type names due to [existing k8s restraints](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/#syntax-and-character-set) on  annotation key lengths.

Author: `operators.operatorframework.io/status.` saves us a few chars.

Reviewer 10: @ecordell -- The `Operator` API uses `operators.coreos.com`, should we change it to match this? 

nit: I can't help but feel like `operators.operator...` is needless stutter; maybe just `operatorframework.io` is prettier?

Author: I support `operatorframework.io` as the prefix - might be difficult to change it in all places though.
